Chernobyl is at its best in the first 3 episodes. That is because these are the episodes which deal directly with the immediate effects of the reactor explosion.If you were to describe what makes Chernobyl good overall, it would be the atmosphere of it. There's nothing particularly interesting about watching people turn valves on and off. Or firefighters assembling and fighting fires. Or bureaucrats discussing matters of protocol. Unless you undergird all of those scenes with a suggestion of enormous evil and dread and danger. This is dramatic tension: the gulf between what the viewer knows (or assumes) and what the characters know.

Ironically, the characters probably know more about the danger than the viewers. We have prescient knowledge, about the ultimate outcome, which the characters do not. But we know far less about the behavior and consequences of a reactor breach, of the intensity of the radiation release, of the effects of exposure to that radiation. We know only what they make available to us of their knowledge, which is not fully revealed until the exact dramatic moment necessary.Instead, we are given vague clues. The operators report that they can taste metal. Technicians at various distances from the reactor suffer various levels of immediate skin damage. Those further away vomit, sometimes blood. The air above the reactor breach glows.

These are only suggestions. Ominous suggestions, no doubt. Which do little to describe the actual form and nature of the evil that opposes them. The evil is, instead, invisible and formless. It infiltrates everything, an unknowable poison that is more than a poison, an energy, spreading through everything and corrupting everything in ways that we do not understand and against which we cannot defend.

In this way the radiation takes on a mystical quality. The reactor itself, whose pre-explosion appearance could easily be a superhero movie device to contain the Big Bad, like a shrine with a failing sigil of protection. The technicians, who can't actually control the reaction, only perform acts to appease it, like priests involved in a desperate ritual to prevent the summoning of an evil god.Post-explosion, the reactor, the evil god now fully summoned, is likewise unknowable. We cannot get a clear glimpse of it, literally because there is too much debris and smoke. And because to look into it is to perish immediately. It is too evil, too powerful, literally and figuratively. We can see it only by its effects on other characters which interact with it, through a hierarchy their symptoms ordered by their proximity to it. There is one scene in particular where a technician must look over the railing, directly into the reactor. For this transgression of seconds, his face is burned intensely. We do not know what the reactor is exactly, only that it holds immense power and malice. That to even behold it is some kind of sin.

Even artifacts imbued with its essence have a destructive magic that annihilates life in a ways we can barely imagine. The firefighters walk amongst graphite which can disfigure their hands in seconds after only a simple touch. Unremarkable stones hold unbearable foreboding. The show has convinced us that they are cursed.

I don't mean convinced in the sense that we think an evil wizard is responsible. I mean convinced us in the sense of establishing our fear of them, our conviction of their power, demonstrated only by the frantic clicking of a geiger counter. A power we feel and expect it in every scene.

The tension then is akin to the radiation. Without knowing the consequences of it, only that it is dread, we are desperate to know more about it, desperate to see the consequences on our characters. In a show about the reaches of scientific mastery of the elements, it converts us to medieval peasants peering fearfully into the dark to find the devil, that we may know him, that we may know our terror.

This is the brilliance of the show. How it lets drip every so slowly the growing knowledge of the evil, so that we see it take shape, understand it, the potential destructive force of it: the stakes. This knowing is what we desire. Unfortunately, once it is known, the tension is fairly drained.

A consequence of this type of invisible adversary is that its menace comes exactly from the unknown -- see also, why you should never show the monster in any monster movie until the very end. As soon as we understand it, and what it will do to us, and how it can be defeated, the calculus changes. Now, it is only a mobilization and accounting game. Solve the problem, but how? Interesting, but not the same kind of interesting as the terror. What are the consequences? Meaningfully tragic and compelling, yes. But not the same feeling as attack by the unknowable terror.

The two other major cathartic veins of this show are watching the apparatchiks you hate get their comeuppance and the paradoxically masochistic appeal of feeling appalled at the enormity of the suffering. These are the catharses explored in the final two episodes, to some satisfaction. We know those partly responsible get 10 years of hard labor. We know the Soviet Union collapses (although we also know what comes after that).However, also present is a shoehorned moralizing about the debt of lies, which, in contrast to the sophistication of the tension building of the first 3 episodes, feels unfortunately sophomoric. A character literally says that lies incur a debt that must be repaid. We know that. We watched the other episodes.It takes the amorphous and semi-religious feeling of the radiation evil and reduces it to a pinpoint statement about truth and lies. It feels like a step backward, and beneath the rest of the filmmaking. As if the point of it all was an indictment of the bureaucracy of the late Soviet Union. I can't imagine a lower-hanging fruit, especially given the specific corruptions of our nation in the present day.

In conclusion first three episodes 11/10, last 2 episodes, idk like 8/10